We trust computer algorithms to be perfectly objective problem solvers,
but this is the New Jim Code, where supposedly neutral math actually inherits human prejudice.
Take a predictive policing system, analyzing a city map to forecast where future crimes will happen.
When a system is deliberately built to amplify social hierarchy, that's engineered inequity.
It happens when algorithms sort people into rigid risk profiles using historical carceral data,
like flawed gang databases. But how does a system discriminate if its code never
explicitly mentions race? By relying on blind defaults. Like using an over-policed zip code
as a proxy for crime. That's default discrimination, inheriting geographical segregation automatically.
Marginalized groups are also heavily watched by tools that systematically misidentify them,
like facial recognition. This specific vulnerability of being hypervisible to surveillance
is known as coded exposure. These dimensions compound. Engineered risk scores, biased zip codes,
and targeted exposure create a discriminatory feedback loop. The algorithm continuously trains
itself on the exact skewed data it just generated. This isn't theoretical. In Canada, systems like
Vancouver Police's Geodash process bulk historical data to direct physical officers on the streets.
And that predictive city map? It doesn't actually forecast future crime.
It just automates the biases of the past.